site/content/docs/content/sources/autodoc.md, before:

---
title: Autodoc
description: Generate API docs from source code
weight: 20
category: guide
icon: book
card_color: blue
tags:
- autodoc
- api-docs
- python
- cli
- openapi
keywords:
- autodoc
- api documentation
- python docstrings
- cli documentation
- openapi
---
# Autodoc

Generate API documentation automatically from source code during site builds.

## Do I Need This?

:::{note}
**Skip this if**: You write all documentation manually.  
**Read this if**: You want API docs from Python docstrings, CLI help from Click commands, or API specs from OpenAPI.
:::

## How It Works

Autodoc generates **virtual pages** during your site build — no intermediate markdown files are created. Simply configure the sources in your `bengal.toml` and the documentation appears in your built site.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Sources
        A[Python Modules]
        B[CLI Commands]
        C[OpenAPI Specs]
    end

    D[Autodoc Engine]

    subgraph Output
        E[Virtual Pages]
    end

    A --> D
    B --> D
    C --> D
    D --> E
```

## Configuration

Configure autodoc in your `bengal.toml`:

:::{tab-set}
:::{tab-item} Python
```toml
# bengal.toml
[autodoc.python]
enabled = true
source_dirs = ["mypackage"]
include_private = false
include_special = false
docstring_style = "auto"  # auto, google, numpy, sphinx
```

Extracts:
- Module and class docstrings
- Function signatures and type hints
- Examples from docstrings
:::

:::{tab-item} CLI
```toml
# bengal.toml
[autodoc.cli]
enabled = true
app_module = "mypackage.cli:main"  # Click app entry point
framework = "click"  # click, argparse, or typer
include_hidden = false
```

Extracts:
- Command descriptions
- Argument documentation
- Option flags and defaults
:::

:::{tab-item} OpenAPI
```toml
# bengal.toml
[autodoc.openapi]
enabled = true
spec_file = "api/openapi.yaml"
```

Extracts:
- Endpoint documentation
- Request/response schemas
- Authentication requirements
:::
:::{/tab-set}

## Python Configuration Options

```toml
[autodoc.python]
enabled = true

# Source directories to scan
source_dirs = ["mypackage"]

# Patterns to exclude
exclude = [
    "*/tests/*",
    "*/__pycache__/*",
    "*/.venv/*",
]

# Docstring parsing style: auto, google, numpy, sphinx
docstring_style = "auto"

# Include private members (_prefixed)
include_private = false

# Include dunder methods (__init__, etc.)
include_special = false

# Include inherited members
include_inherited = false

# Prefix to strip from module paths
strip_prefix = "mypackage"
```

## Building with Autodoc

Once configured, autodoc runs automatically during builds:

```bash
bengal build
```

The generated API documentation appears in your output directory alongside your regular content.

## Strict Mode

Enable strict mode to fail builds on extraction or rendering errors:

```toml
[autodoc]
strict = true
```

:::{tip}
**Best practice**: Enable strict mode in CI pipelines to catch documentation issues early.
:::

:::{seealso}
- [Architecture Reference](/docs/reference/architecture/subsystems/autodoc/) — Technical details and API usage
:::

Commit message:

autodoc: add api-hub type for aggregating sections; create agnostic landing template
- section_builders.py: aggregating sections now use 'api-hub' type instead of
  inheriting first child's type; track child_types in metadata for template
- utils.py: add template dir mapping for 'api-hub' → 'api-hub'
- templates/api-hub/section-index.html: new template showing all API types
  (Python, REST, CLI) with type-aware icons, labels, and counts
- api-explorer.css: add .api-hub-* styles with type-specific accent colors
- tests: add test_aggregating_sections.py covering type assignment and mapping

The /api/ landing page now displays an agnostic hub showing all child API
documentation types instead of using Python-specific 'Packages/Modules' labels.
Supports optional _index.md override for custom content.

site/content/docs/content/sources/autodoc.md, after:

---
title: Autodoc
description: Generate API docs from source code
weight: 20
category: guide
icon: book
card_color: blue
tags:
- autodoc
- api-docs
- python
- cli
- openapi
keywords:
- autodoc
- api documentation
- python docstrings
- cli documentation
- openapi
---
# Autodoc

Generate API documentation automatically from source code during site builds.

## Do I Need This?

:::{note}
**Skip this if**: You write all documentation manually.  
**Read this if**: You want API docs from Python docstrings, CLI help from Click commands, or API specs from OpenAPI.
:::

## How It Works

Autodoc generates **virtual pages** during your site build — no intermediate markdown files are created. Simply configure the sources in your `bengal.toml` and the documentation appears in your built site.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Sources
        A[Python Modules]
        B[CLI Commands]
        C[OpenAPI Specs]
    end

    D[Autodoc Engine]

    subgraph Output
        E[Virtual Pages]
    end

    A --> D
    B --> D
    C --> D
    D --> E
```

## Configuration

Configure autodoc in your `bengal.toml`:

:::{tab-set}
:::{tab-item} Python
```toml
# bengal.toml
[autodoc.python]
enabled = true
source_dirs = ["mypackage"]
include_private = false
include_special = false
docstring_style = "auto"  # auto, google, numpy, sphinx
```

Extracts:
- Module and class docstrings
- Function signatures and type hints
- Examples from docstrings
:::

:::{tab-item} CLI
```toml
# bengal.toml
[autodoc.cli]
enabled = true
app_module = "mypackage.cli:main"  # Click app entry point
framework = "click"  # click, argparse, or typer
include_hidden = false
```

Extracts:
- Command descriptions
- Argument documentation
- Option flags and defaults
:::

:::{tab-item} OpenAPI
```toml
# bengal.toml
[autodoc.openapi]
enabled = true
spec_file = "api/openapi.yaml"
```

Extracts:
- Endpoint documentation
- Request/response schemas
- Authentication requirements
:::
:::{/tab-set}

## Python Configuration Options

```toml
[autodoc.python]
enabled = true

# Source directories to scan
source_dirs = ["mypackage"]

# Patterns to exclude
exclude = [
    "*/tests/*",
    "*/__pycache__/*",
    "*/.venv/*",
]

# Docstring parsing style: auto, google, numpy, sphinx
docstring_style = "auto"

# Include private members (_prefixed)
include_private = false

# Include dunder methods (__init__, etc.)
include_special = false

# Include inherited members
include_inherited = false

# Prefix to strip from module paths
strip_prefix = "mypackage"
```

## Building with Autodoc

Once configured, autodoc runs automatically during builds:

```bash
bengal build
```

The generated API documentation appears in your output directory alongside your regular content.

## Navigation (topbar)

If you do not define `menu.main`, Bengal generates a topbar menu automatically.

- **Manual menu overrides auto menu**: If `menu.main` is present and non-empty, Bengal uses it and does not auto-discover topbar items. (`bengal/orchestration/menu.py:401-406`, `bengal/rendering/template_functions/navigation.py:904-915`)
- **Dev dropdown**: In auto mode, Bengal may bundle autodoc outputs under a **Dev** dropdown when multiple “dev” links exist. If there is only one dev link (for example, API-only or CLI-only), it appears as a normal top-level menu entry.

If you want full control of where autodoc appears in the topbar, define `menu.main`.

## Strict Mode

Enable strict mode to fail builds on extraction or rendering errors:

```toml
[autodoc]
strict = true
```

:::{tip}
**Best practice**: Enable strict mode in CI pipelines to catch documentation issues early.
:::

:::{seealso}
- [Architecture Reference](/docs/reference/architecture/subsystems/autodoc/) — Technical details and API usage
:::
