site/content/docs/guides/_index.md, before:

---
title: Guides
description: Step-by-step tutorials
weight: 20
draft: false
lang: en
tags: [guides, tutorials, how-to]
keywords: [guides, tutorials, how-to, step-by-step]
category: guide
cascade:
  type: doc
---

# Guides

Step-by-step guides for common tasks with Bengal.

## Available Guides

### Content Strategy (Advanced)

- **[Curated Tracks](/docs/guides/curated-tracks/)** - Build linear "courses" or learning paths from existing articles
- **[Content Reuse](/docs/guides/content-reuse/)** - "Write Once, Publish Everywhere" strategies using data files and shortcodes
- **[Advanced Filtering](/docs/guides/advanced-filtering/)** - Build dynamic pages that filter by multiple tags (intersections)

### Getting Started

- **[Build a Blog in 15 Minutes](/docs/guides/blog-from-scratch/)** - The perfect starting point. Go from zero to a deployed personal blog.
- **[Migrating Content](/docs/guides/migrating-content/)** - Migrate your site from Hugo, Jekyll, Gatsby, or other SSGs
- **[Content Workflow](/docs/guides/content-workflow/)** - Set up an efficient content creation and publishing workflow
- **[Customizing Themes](/docs/guides/customizing-themes/)** - Customize existing themes without breaking updates
- **[CI/CD Setup](/docs/guides/ci-cd-setup/)** - Automate builds, testing, and deployments
- **[Deployment](/docs/guides/deployment/)** - Deploy your site to production

### Site Optimization

- **[Graph Analysis](/docs/guides/graph-analysis/)** - Analyze site structure, improve internal linking, and optimize navigation using graph analysis tools

## Guide Types

Each guide provides detailed, step-by-step instructions to help you accomplish specific goals:

- **Step-by-step instructions** - Clear, actionable steps
- **Code examples** - Copy-paste ready code snippets
- **Troubleshooting** - Common issues and solutions
- **Best practices** - Recommended approaches and patterns

## Need Help?

- Check the [Getting Started](/docs/getting-started/) section for basics
- Review [Concepts](/docs/about/concepts/) for understanding Bengal's architecture
- See [API Reference](/api/) for technical details

Commit message:

docs(guides): add Remote Content Sources guide; update content-collections to reference loaders

site/content/docs/guides/_index.md, after:

---
title: Guides
description: Step-by-step tutorials
weight: 20
draft: false
lang: en
tags: [guides, tutorials, how-to]
keywords: [guides, tutorials, how-to, step-by-step]
category: guide
cascade:
  type: doc
---

# Guides

Step-by-step guides for common tasks with Bengal.

## Available Guides

### Content Strategy (Advanced)

- **[Curated Tracks](/docs/guides/curated-tracks/)** - Build linear "courses" or learning paths from existing articles
- **[Content Reuse](/docs/guides/content-reuse/)** - "Write Once, Publish Everywhere" strategies using data files and shortcodes
- **[Advanced Filtering](/docs/guides/advanced-filtering/)** - Build dynamic pages that filter by multiple tags (intersections)

### Getting Started

- **[Build a Blog in 15 Minutes](/docs/guides/blog-from-scratch/)** - The perfect starting point. Go from zero to a deployed personal blog.
- **[Migrating Content](/docs/guides/migrating-content/)** - Migrate your site from Hugo, Jekyll, Gatsby, or other SSGs
- **[Content Workflow](/docs/guides/content-workflow/)** - Set up an efficient content creation and publishing workflow
- **[Customizing Themes](/docs/guides/customizing-themes/)** - Customize existing themes without breaking updates
- **[CI/CD Setup](/docs/guides/ci-cd-setup/)** - Automate builds, testing, and deployments
- **[Deployment](/docs/guides/deployment/)** - Deploy your site to production

### Content Management

- **[Content Collections](/docs/guides/content-collections/)** - Validate frontmatter with typed schemas
- **[Remote Content Sources](/docs/guides/content-sources/)** - Fetch content from GitHub, Notion, REST APIs

### Site Optimization

- **[Graph Analysis](/docs/guides/graph-analysis/)** - Analyze site structure, improve internal linking, and optimize navigation using graph analysis tools

## Guide Types

Each guide provides detailed, step-by-step instructions to help you accomplish specific goals:

- **Step-by-step instructions** - Clear, actionable steps
- **Code examples** - Copy-paste ready code snippets
- **Troubleshooting** - Common issues and solutions
- **Best practices** - Recommended approaches and patterns

## Need Help?

- Check the [Getting Started](/docs/getting-started/) section for basics
- Review [Concepts](/docs/about/concepts/) for understanding Bengal's architecture
- See [API Reference](/api/) for technical details
