site/content/docs/reference/architecture/_index.md, before:

---
title: Architecture
description: High-level architecture overview of Bengal
weight: 50
type: doc
tags:
- architecture
- overview
- design
- systems
- components
keywords:
- architecture
- design
- overview
- systems
- components
- structure
category: architecture
cascade:
  type: doc
icon: folder
---
# Architecture Overview

Bengal SSG follows a modular architecture with clear separation of concerns to avoid "God objects" and maintain high performance even with large sites.

:::{child-cards}
:columns: 2
:include: sections
:fields: title, description, icon
:::

## High-Level Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Entry Points"
        CLI[CLI<br/>bengal/cli/]
        Server[Dev Server<br/>bengal/server/]
    end

    subgraph "Core Build Pipeline"
        Discovery[Discovery<br/>bengal/discovery/]
        Orchestration[Orchestration<br/>bengal/orchestration/]
        Rendering[Rendering<br/>bengal/rendering/]
        PostProcess[Post-Processing<br/>bengal/postprocess/]
    end

    subgraph "Object Model"
        Site[Site<br/>bengal/core/site.py]
        Pages[Pages<br/>bengal/core/page/]
        Sections[Sections<br/>bengal/core/section.py]
        Assets[Assets<br/>bengal/core/asset/]
        Menus[Menus<br/>bengal/core/menu.py]
        NavTree[NavTree<br/>bengal/core/nav_tree.py]
    end

    subgraph "Supporting Systems"
        Cache[Build Cache<br/>bengal/cache/]
        Health[Health Checks<br/>bengal/health/]
        Autodoc[Autodoc<br/>bengal/autodoc/]
        Config[Config<br/>bengal/config/]
        Analysis[Analysis<br/>bengal/analysis/]
        Fonts[Fonts<br/>bengal/fonts/]
        Collections[Collections<br/>bengal/collections/]
        ContentLayer[Content Layer<br/>bengal/content_layer/]
        Output[CLI Output<br/>bengal/output/]
        Debug[Debug Tools<br/>bengal/debug/]
    end

    CLI --> Site
    Server --> Site
    Site --> Discovery
    Discovery --> Pages
    Discovery --> Sections
    Discovery --> Assets
    Site --> Orchestration
    Orchestration --> Menus
    Orchestration --> Rendering
    Site --> NavTree
    Sections -.->|"builds from"| NavTree
    Menus -.->|"used by"| Rendering
    NavTree -.->|"used by"| Rendering
    Rendering --> PostProcess
    Cache -.->|"cache checks"| Orchestration
    Health -.->|"validation"| PostProcess
    Autodoc -.->|"generates"| Pages
    Config -.->|"configuration"| Site
    Analysis -.->|"analyzes"| Site
    Fonts -.->|"downloads/generates"| Assets
    Collections -.->|"schema validation"| Discovery
    ContentLayer -.->|"remote sources"| Collections
    Output -.->|"terminal output"| CLI
    Debug -.->|"diagnostics"| Site
```

**Key Flows:**
1. **Build**: CLI → Site → Discovery → Orchestration → [Menus + Rendering] → Post-Process
2. **Menu Building**: Orchestration builds menus → Rendering uses menus in templates
3. **Navigation Tree**: Site builds NavTree from sections → Cached per version → Rendering uses for O(1) template access
4. **Cache**: Build Cache checks file changes and dependencies before rebuilding
5. **Autodoc**: Generate Python/CLI docs → treated as regular content pages
6. **Dev Server**: Watch files → trigger incremental rebuilds → serve output
7. **Collections**: Type-safe content schemas → validate frontmatter during discovery
8. **Content Layer**: Unified API for local/remote content → integrates with Collections
9. **CLI Output**: Centralized terminal output → profile-aware formatting for all commands
10. **Debug Tools**: Diagnostic utilities → explain builds, analyze dependencies, debug incremental issues

## Module Overview

### Core Modules

- **`core/`**: Passive data models (Site, Page, Section, Asset, Menu, NavTree)
- **`orchestration/`**: Build coordination via specialized orchestrators
- **`rendering/`**: Template engine, Markdown parsing, directive system
- **`discovery/`**: Content and asset discovery from filesystem or remote sources

### Supporting Modules

- **`cache/`**: Build cache, dependency tracking, query indexes
- **`collections/`**: Type-safe content schemas with validation
- **`content_layer/`**: Unified API for local/remote content sources
- **`content_types/`**: Content strategies (Blog, Docs, Portfolio)
- **`directives/`**: MyST-style directives for markdown (cards, tabs, navigation, etc.)
- **`postprocess/`**: Sitemap, RSS, link validation
- **`health/`**: Content validation and health checks
- **`config/`**: Configuration loading and validation
- **`cli/`**: Command-line interface
- **`output/`**: Centralized CLI output system
- **`server/`**: Development server with live reload
- **`utils/`**: Shared utilities

### Feature Subsystems

- **`autodoc/`**: Generate docs from Python, CLI, OpenAPI
- **`analysis/`**: Graph analysis, PageRank, link suggestions
- **`fonts/`**: Google Fonts download and self-hosting
- **`debug/`**: Diagnostic tools for understanding builds
- **`services/`**: Service interfaces and implementations
- **`assets/`**: Asset processing pipeline and manifest generation

## Object Model Relationships

### NavTree ↔ Section Relationship

`NavTree` is built from the site's `Section` hierarchy:

- **NavTree.build()** traverses `site.sections` and creates `NavNode` structures
- Each `NavNode` can reference a `Section` (via `node.section`) or a `Page` (via `node.page`)
- Version filtering uses `Section.pages_for_version()` and `Section.subsections_for_version()`
- The tree is cached per version for O(1) template access

**Benefits:**
- Pre-computed structure eliminates template-side version filtering overhead
- Immutable cached trees preserve thread safety
- Active trail computation happens once per page render (via `NavTreeContext`)

Commit message:

docs(architecture): tighten pages for progressive disclosure; remove version-chatter and low-signal metrics

site/content/docs/reference/architecture/_index.md, after:

---
title: Architecture
description: High-level architecture overview of Bengal
weight: 50
type: doc
tags:
- architecture
- overview
- design
- systems
- components
keywords:
- architecture
- design
- overview
- systems
- components
- structure
category: architecture
cascade:
  type: doc
icon: folder
---
# Architecture Overview

Bengal is organized as a set of small subsystems with clear boundaries. Use this section to orient yourself and then jump to the specific subsystem you are changing.

## How to use this section

- Start with the overview diagram on this page.
- Use the cards to jump to a subsystem.
- Prefer subsystem pages over repeating context here.

:::{child-cards}
:columns: 2
:include: sections
:fields: title, description, icon
:::

## High-Level Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Entry Points"
        CLI[CLI<br/>bengal/cli/]
        Server[Dev Server<br/>bengal/server/]
    end

    subgraph "Core Build Pipeline"
        Discovery[Discovery<br/>bengal/discovery/]
        Orchestration[Orchestration<br/>bengal/orchestration/]
        Rendering[Rendering<br/>bengal/rendering/]
        PostProcess[Post-Processing<br/>bengal/postprocess/]
    end

    subgraph "Object Model"
        Site[Site<br/>bengal/core/site/]
        Pages[Pages<br/>bengal/core/page/]
        Sections[Sections<br/>bengal/core/section.py]
        Assets[Assets<br/>bengal/core/asset/]
        Menus[Menus<br/>bengal/core/menu.py]
        NavTree[NavTree<br/>bengal/core/nav_tree.py]
    end

    subgraph "Supporting Systems"
        Cache[Build Cache<br/>bengal/cache/]
        Health[Health Checks<br/>bengal/health/]
        Autodoc[Autodoc<br/>bengal/autodoc/]
        Config[Config<br/>bengal/config/]
        Analysis[Analysis<br/>bengal/analysis/]
        Fonts[Fonts<br/>bengal/fonts/]
        Collections[Collections<br/>bengal/collections/]
        ContentLayer[Content Layer<br/>bengal/content_layer/]
        Output[CLI Output<br/>bengal/output/]
        Debug[Debug Tools<br/>bengal/debug/]
    end

    CLI --> Site
    Server --> Site
    Site --> Discovery
    Discovery --> Pages
    Discovery --> Sections
    Discovery --> Assets
    Site --> Orchestration
    Orchestration --> Menus
    Orchestration --> Rendering
    Site --> NavTree
    Sections -.->|"builds from"| NavTree
    Menus -.->|"used by"| Rendering
    NavTree -.->|"used by"| Rendering
    Rendering --> PostProcess
    Cache -.->|"cache checks"| Orchestration
    Health -.->|"validation"| PostProcess
    Autodoc -.->|"generates"| Pages
    Config -.->|"configuration"| Site
    Analysis -.->|"analyzes"| Site
    Fonts -.->|"downloads/generates"| Assets
    Collections -.->|"schema validation"| Discovery
    ContentLayer -.->|"remote sources"| Collections
    Output -.->|"terminal output"| CLI
    Debug -.->|"diagnostics"| Site
```

::::{dropdown} Key flows (overview)
1. **Build**: CLI → Site → Discovery → Orchestration → Rendering → Post-process
2. **Dev server**: watch → incremental rebuild → serve output
3. **Template context**: Site + Page + NavTree → Rendering
::::

## Module Overview

### Core Modules

- **`core/`**: Passive data models (Site, Page, Section, Asset, Menu, NavTree)
- **`orchestration/`**: Build coordination via specialized orchestrators
- **`rendering/`**: Template engine, Markdown parsing, directive system
- **`discovery/`**: Content and asset discovery from filesystem or remote sources

### Supporting Modules

- **`cache/`**: Build cache, dependency tracking, query indexes
- **`collections/`**: Type-safe content schemas with validation
- **`content_layer/`**: Unified API for local/remote content sources
- **`content_types/`**: Content strategies (Blog, Docs, Portfolio)
- **`directives/`**: MyST-style directives for markdown (cards, tabs, navigation, etc.)
- **`postprocess/`**: Sitemap, RSS, link validation
- **`health/`**: Content validation and health checks
- **`config/`**: Configuration loading and validation
- **`cli/`**: Command-line interface
- **`output/`**: Centralized CLI output system
- **`server/`**: Development server with live reload
- **`utils/`**: Shared utilities

### Feature Subsystems

- **`autodoc/`**: Generate docs from Python, CLI, OpenAPI
- **`analysis/`**: Graph analysis, PageRank, link suggestions
- **`fonts/`**: Google Fonts download and self-hosting
- **`debug/`**: Diagnostic tools for understanding builds
- **`services/`**: Service interfaces and implementations
- **`assets/`**: Asset processing pipeline and manifest generation

## Pointers

- **Object model**: refer to [Object Model](core/object-model/)
- **Rendering pipeline**: refer to [Rendering Pipeline](rendering/rendering/)
- **Build orchestration**: refer to [Orchestration](core/orchestration/)
