site/content/docs/about/_index.md, before:

---
title: About
description: Concepts, benchmarks, and reference
weight: 5
layout: list
menu:
  main:
    weight: 40
cascade:
  type: doc
icon: info
---
# About

Bengal is a high-performance static site generator built in Python for Python 3.14+. It transforms Markdown content into fast, beautiful websites with minimal configuration and maximum speed.

## Use Cases

- **Documentation Sites** — Technical docs with automatic API reference generation from Python source code
- **Blogs & Journals** — Personal and professional writing with tags, categories, and related posts
- **Product & Marketing Sites** — Landing pages, portfolios, and company websites
- **Knowledge Bases** — Internal wikis and help centers with full-text search

## Why Bengal?

| Benefit | What It Means |
|---------|---------------|
| **Fast Builds** | Parallel processing + incremental builds = 18-42× faster rebuilds on large sites |
| **Python-Native** | Built for Python 3.14+ with free-threading support; no Node.js required |
| **Auto API Docs** | AST-based autodoc generates reference docs from your Python source and CLI tools |
| **Batteries Included** | Dev server, live reload, syntax highlighting, sitemap, RSS, search—all built in |
| **Flexible Theming** | Theme inheritance, template swizzling, and 200+ CSS design tokens |
| **Content First** | Markdown with MyST directives, YAML/TOML front matter, and cascading config |

---

:::{child-cards}
:columns: 2
:include: all
:fields: title, description, icon
:::

Commit message:

directives: complete migration from bengal.rendering.plugins.directives to bengal.directives
- Move all directive implementations to bengal/directives/
- Update all imports across codebase to use new path
- Remove old bengal/rendering/plugins/directives/*.py files
- Add lazy-loading for DIRECTIVE_CLASSES via __getattr__
- Keep bengal/rendering/plugins/directives/__init__.py as re-export stub
- Export ADMONITION_TYPES and CODE_BLOCK_DIRECTIVES from main package
- Fix lint errors: type comparisons, nested ifs, contextlib.suppress

site/content/docs/about/_index.md, after:

---
title: About
description: Concepts, benchmarks, and reference
weight: 5
layout: list
menu:
  main:
    weight: 40
cascade:
  type: doc
icon: info
---
# About

Bengal is a high-performance static site generator built in Python for Python 3.14+. It transforms Markdown content into fast, beautiful websites with minimal configuration and maximum speed.

## Use Cases

- **Documentation Sites** — Technical docs with automatic API reference generation from Python source code
- **Blogs & Journals** — Personal and professional writing with tags, categories, and related posts
- **Product & Marketing Sites** — Landing pages, portfolios, and company websites
- **Knowledge Bases** — Internal wikis and help centers with full-text search

## Why Bengal?

| Benefit | What It Means |
|---------|---------------|
| **Fast Builds** | Parallel processing + incremental builds = 18-42× faster rebuilds on large sites |
| **Python-Native** | Built for Python 3.14+ with free-threading support; no Node.js required |
| **Auto API Docs** | AST-based autodoc generates reference docs from your Python source and CLI tools |
| **Batteries Included** | Dev server, live reload, syntax highlighting, sitemap, RSS, search—all built in |
| **Flexible Theming** | Theme inheritance, template swizzling, and 200+ CSS design tokens |
| **Content First** | Markdown with MyST directives, YAML/TOML front matter, and cascading config |

## Philosophy

Bengal prioritizes **correctness and clarity over backwards compatibility**. Each release represents the best solution we know how to deliver—when existing behavior no longer reflects the best design, it may be changed.

This keeps the codebase healthy and enables rapid evolution. See [[docs/about/philosophy|Project Philosophy]] for details.

---

:::{child-cards}
:columns: 2
:include: all
:fields: title, description, icon
:::
