site/content/docs/reference/architecture/rendering/assets-pipeline.md, before:

---
title: Asset Pipeline
description: How Bengal processes and optimizes static assets (CSS, JS, images, fonts)
weight: 30
category: rendering
tags: [rendering, assets, pipeline, minification, optimization, fingerprinting, css, js, images]
keywords: [assets, asset pipeline, minification, optimization, fingerprinting, CSS, JavaScript, images]
---

# Asset Pipeline

Bengal's asset pipeline provides efficient processing and delivery of static assets (CSS, JS, images, fonts) with optimization support.

## Overview

The asset pipeline (`bengal/assets/pipeline.py`) is a lightweight system that:
- Discovers assets from site and theme directories
- Processes assets (minification, optimization)
- Manages asset fingerprinting for cache busting
- Copies processed assets to output directory
- Integrates with incremental builds

## Asset Object (`bengal/core/asset.py`)

### Purpose
Represents a static file with metadata and processing capabilities

### Key Attributes
```python
class Asset:
    source_path: Path          # Original file location
    output_path: Path          # Destination in output directory
    asset_type: str            # Type (css, js, image, font, etc.)
    fingerprint: Optional[str] # SHA256 hash for cache busting
    minified: bool             # Whether asset has been minified
    optimized: bool            # Whether asset has been optimized
    metadata: Dict             # Additional metadata
```

### Asset Types

| Type | Extensions | Processing |
|------|-----------|------------|
| **CSS** | `.css`, `.scss`, `.sass`, `.less` | Minification, source maps |
| **JavaScript** | `.js`, `.mjs`, `.ts` | Minification, source maps |
| **Images** | `.jpg`, `.png`, `.gif`, `.webp`, `.svg` | Optimization, format conversion |
| **Fonts** | `.woff`, `.woff2`, `.ttf`, `.otf` | Copy only (already optimized) |
| **Data** | `.json`, `.yaml`, `.xml`, `.csv` | Copy, optional compression |
| **Other** | All others | Copy only |

### Key Methods

```python
def minify(self) -> None:
    """Minify CSS/JS files."""
    if self.asset_type in ('css', 'js'):
        minified_content = minifier.minify(self.content)
        self.save_minified(minified_content)
        self.minified = True

def optimize(self) -> None:
    """Optimize images (compression, format conversion)."""
    if self.asset_type == 'image':
        optimized = image_optimizer.optimize(self.source_path)
        self.save_optimized(optimized)
        self.optimized = True

def hash(self) -> str:
    """Generate SHA256 fingerprint for cache busting."""
    content = self.source_path.read_bytes()
    return hashlib.sha256(content).hexdigest()[:12]

def copy_to_output(self) -> None:
    """Copy asset to output directory with fingerprint."""
    if self.fingerprint:
        # Add fingerprint to filename
        # style.css -> style.abc123.css
        output = self.add_fingerprint_to_path()
    else:
        output = self.output_path

    shutil.copy2(self.source_path, output)
```

## Asset Discovery (`bengal/discovery/asset_discovery.py`)

### Purpose
Finds all static assets in site and theme directories

### Discovery Process

```python
def discover(site) -> List[Asset]:
    assets = []

    # 1. Discover site assets
    site_assets = discover_directory(site.assets_dir)
    assets.extend(site_assets)

    # 2. Discover theme assets
    if site.theme:
        theme_assets = discover_directory(site.theme.assets_dir)
        assets.extend(theme_assets)

    # 3. Preserve relative paths
    for asset in assets:
        asset.output_path = determine_output_path(asset)

    return assets

def discover_directory(path: Path) -> List[Asset]:
    assets = []
    for file_path in path.rglob('*'):
        if file_path.is_file() and not should_ignore(file_path):
            asset = Asset(
                source_path=file_path,
                asset_type=detect_type(file_path),
                metadata=extract_metadata(file_path)
            )
            assets.append(asset)
    return assets
```

### Exclusions
- Hidden files (`.gitignore`, `.DS_Store`)
- Cache directories (`.cache/`, `__pycache__/`)
- Build outputs (if nested incorrectly)
- Configurable ignore patterns

## Asset Pipeline (`bengal/assets/pipeline.py`)

### Purpose
Central coordinator for asset processing

### Processing Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start[Asset Discovery] --> Filter{Incremental?}

    Filter -->|Yes| Changed[Filter Changed Assets]
    Filter -->|No| All[All Assets]

    Changed --> Process[Process Assets]
    All --> Process

    Process --> Check{Asset Type}

    Check -->|CSS/JS| Minify[Minify]
    Check -->|Image| Optimize[Optimize]
    Check -->|Other| Copy[Copy Only]

    Minify --> Hash[Generate Hash]
    Optimize --> Hash
    Copy --> Hash

    Hash --> Output[Copy to Output]
    Output --> Done[Complete]
```

### Implementation

```python
class AssetPipeline:
    def __init__(self, site: Site, config: Dict):
        self.site = site
        self.config = config
        self.minify_enabled = config.get('minify_assets', True)
        self.optimize_images = config.get('optimize_images', True)
        self.fingerprint = config.get('fingerprint_assets', False)

    def process(self, assets: List[Asset], parallel: bool = True) -> None:
        # Separate CSS entries (require bundling) from other assets
        css_entries = [a for a in assets if a.is_css_entry_point()]
        other = [a for a in assets if not a.is_css_entry_point()]

        should_run_parallel = parallel and (
            len(assets) > 5 or (css_entries and other)
        )

        if should_run_parallel:
            # Unified thread pool for both CSS bundling and asset processing
            with ThreadPoolExecutor() as executor:
                # Submit CSS bundling tasks
                for entry in css_entries:
                    executor.submit(self.process_css, entry)

                # Submit other asset tasks
                for asset in other:
                    executor.submit(self.process_asset, asset)
        else:
            # Sequential fallback
            for asset in assets:
                self.process_asset(asset)

    def process_asset(self, asset: Asset) -> None:
        # 1. Minification
        if self.minify_enabled and asset.should_minify():
            asset.minify()

        # 2. Optimization
        if self.optimize_images and asset.should_optimize():
            asset.optimize()

        # 3. Fingerprinting
        if self.fingerprint:
            asset.fingerprint = asset.hash()

        # 4. Copy to output
        asset.copy_to_output()

        # 5. Update cache
        if self.incremental:
            self.cache.update_hash(asset.source_path)
```

## Asset Dependency Tracking (`bengal/cache/asset_dependency_map.py`)

### Purpose
Tracks relationships between assets (imports, references)

### Use Cases
- CSS imports: `@import "variables.css"`
- JS imports: `import { foo } from './module.js'`
- Image references in CSS: `background: url('image.png')`

### Implementation

```python
class AssetDependencyMap:
    def __init__(self):
        self.dependencies: Dict[Path, Set[Path]] = {}

    def add_dependency(self, asset: Path, dependency: Path) -> None:
        if asset not in self.dependencies:
            self.dependencies[asset] = set()
        self.dependencies[asset].add(dependency)

    def get_affected_assets(self, changed_asset: Path) -> Set[Path]:
        """Find all assets that depend on the changed asset."""
        affected = set()
        for asset, deps in self.dependencies.items():
            if changed_asset in deps:
                affected.add(asset)
        return affected
```

### Integration with Incremental Builds
When a CSS file changes, all CSS files that import it are also rebuilt.

## Configuration

Asset pipeline is configured via `bengal.toml`:

```toml
[assets]
# Enable/disable minification
minify_css = true
minify_js = true

# Enable/disable image optimization
optimize_images = true

# Fingerprinting for cache busting
fingerprint = false  # or true for production

# Exclude patterns
exclude = [
    "*.map",
    "*.orig",
    "drafts/**",
]

# Optimization settings
[assets.images]
quality = 85  # JPEG quality (1-100)
strip_metadata = true  # Remove EXIF data
formats = ["webp"]  # Generate additional formats
```

## Minification

### CSS Minification
- Removes whitespace and comments
- Shortens color codes (#ffffff → #fff)
- Combines selectors
- Removes unused rules (future)

### JavaScript Minification
- Removes whitespace and comments
- Shortens variable names (optional)
- Dead code elimination (optional)

### Implementation
Uses `lightningcss` for CSS and `rjsmin` for JS (pure Python, no Node.js required)

## Image Optimization

### Supported Operations
- Lossless compression (PNG, WebP)
- Lossy compression with quality control (JPEG)
- Metadata stripping (EXIF, IPTC)
- Format conversion (e.g., PNG → WebP)
- Resizing (future)
- Responsive image generation (future)

### Implementation
Uses `Pillow` for image processing (widely available, pure Python + C extensions)

## Cache Busting

### Fingerprinting Strategy
Assets can include content hash in filename:

```
Original:      style.css
Fingerprinted: style.abc123.css
```

### Template Integration
Fingerprinted paths available in templates:

```jinja2
<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ asset_url('style.css') }}">
<!-- Renders as: -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/assets/style.abc123.css">
```

### Benefits
- Long cache TTL (1 year+)
- No stale cache issues
- Automatic invalidation on changes

## Asset Manifest System (0.1.4+)

Bengal generates a deterministic `asset-manifest.json` file that maps logical asset names to their fingerprinted output files. This ensures reliable asset resolution and eliminates stale fingerprinted assets.

### Purpose

The asset manifest solves several problems:
- **Stale Assets**: Prevents old fingerprinted files (e.g., `style.95230091.css`) from persisting after updates
- **Dev/Prod Sync**: Ensures development and production CSS stay in sync
- **Reliable Resolution**: Provides deterministic asset resolution without glob matching
- **Cache Busting**: Enables long cache TTLs with automatic invalidation

### Manifest Format

The manifest is written to `public/asset-manifest.json`:

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "generated_at": "2025-11-25T12:00:00Z",
  "assets": {
    "css/style.css": {
      "output_path": "assets/css/style.a1b2c3.css",
      "fingerprint": "a1b2c3",
      "size_bytes": 12345,
      "updated_at": "2025-11-25T12:00:00Z"
    },
    "js/app.js": {
      "output_path": "assets/js/app.d4e5f6.js",
      "fingerprint": "d4e5f6",
      "size_bytes": 67890
    }
  }
}
```

### Manifest-Driven Resolution

The `asset_url()` template helper consults the manifest first:

```python
def asset_url(logical_path: str) -> str:
    """Resolve logical asset path to fingerprinted output."""
    # 1. Check manifest first (deterministic)
    manifest = AssetManifest.load(site.output_dir / "asset-manifest.json")
    if manifest:
        entry = manifest.get(logical_path)
        if entry:
            return f"/{entry.output_path}"

    # 2. Fallback to glob matching (backward compatibility)
    return glob_find_asset(logical_path)
```

### Stale Fingerprint Cleanup

Before writing new fingerprinted files, Bengal:
1. Loads existing manifest (if present)
2. Identifies stale fingerprinted files (not in new manifest)
3. Removes stale files from output directory
4. Writes new manifest with updated mappings

This ensures only current assets exist in the output directory.

### CLI Inspection

Use `bengal assets status` to inspect asset mappings:

```bash
$ bengal assets status
Asset Manifest
css/style.css → /assets/css/style.a1b2c3.css (fingerprint: a1b2c3)
js/app.js → /assets/js/app.d4e5f6.js (fingerprint: d4e5f6)
```

This helps debug asset issues and verify manifest correctness.

### Integration with Build Process

The manifest is generated during asset processing:

```python
class AssetOrchestrator:
    def process(self):
        # ... process assets ...

        # Generate manifest
        manifest = AssetManifest()
        for asset in processed_assets:
            manifest.set_entry(
                logical_path=asset.logical_path,
                output_path=asset.output_path,
                fingerprint=asset.fingerprint,
                size_bytes=asset.size_bytes,
            )

        # Write manifest
        manifest.write(site.output_dir / "asset-manifest.json")
```

### Clean Output Builds

Use `--clean-output` flag to ensure clean builds:

```bash
bengal site build --clean-output
```

This removes all output files (including stale fingerprinted assets) before building, ensuring deterministic builds. Perfect for CI/CD pipelines.

### Benefits

- **Deterministic**: Same logical path always resolves to same fingerprinted file
- **Reliable**: No glob matching fallback needed (though still supported for backward compatibility)
- **Debuggable**: Manifest provides visibility into asset mappings
- **Clean**: Stale assets automatically removed
- **Fast**: O(1) lookup via dictionary

See: `bengal/assets/manifest.py` for implementation details.

## Performance

### Parallel Processing
Assets are processed in parallel using a **unified worker pool** when:
- 5+ assets to process OR mixed workload (CSS + other assets)
- Parallel mode enabled (default)
- Worker pool available

**Optimization (2025-11)**: CSS bundling and static asset processing (images, JS) now run concurrently in the same thread pool. This eliminates the "hang" where the build would wait for CSS to finish before starting image optimization.

**Measured speedup**: 2-3x for 10+ assets

### Incremental Builds
Only changed assets are reprocessed:
- File content hash comparison
- Dependency tracking for imports
- Cache invalidation on changes

**Measured speedup**: 15-30x for single asset changes

### Optimization Trade-offs
Image optimization is slowest operation (~100-500ms per image). Can be disabled for dev builds:

```toml
[assets]
optimize_images = false  # Dev mode
```

## Integration Points

### With Discovery
- AssetDiscovery finds assets
- AssetOrchestrator processes them
- Asset objects created and tracked

### With Incremental Builds
- BuildCache tracks asset file hashes
- AssetDependencyMap tracks imports
- Only changed assets reprocessed

### With Templates
- `asset_url()` function resolves asset paths
- Fingerprinted paths handled automatically
- Theme asset resolution

### With Themes
- Theme assets discovered automatically
- Theme assets override site assets
- Fallback chain: site → theme → default

## Health Validation

AssetValidator checks:
- All referenced assets exist
- Minification completed (if enabled)
- Optimization completed (if enabled)
- File sizes reasonable
- No broken asset references

```bash
bengal site build
# Asset validation runs automatically
# Reports missing assets, oversized files, etc.
```

## Future Enhancements

1. **Responsive Images**: Generate multiple sizes automatically
2. **Modern Format Support**: AVIF, WebP with fallbacks
3. **CSS Purging**: Remove unused CSS automatically
4. **Sprite Generation**: Combine small images into sprites
5. **CDN Integration**: Upload assets to CDN automatically
6. **Source Maps**: Generate source maps for minified files
7. **Preprocessor Support**: Built-in SCSS/Less compilation

## Testing

Asset pipeline testing:
- Unit tests: `tests/unit/test_asset.py`
- Integration tests: `tests/integration/test_asset_pipeline.py`
- Performance tests: `tests/performance/test_asset_processing.py`

**Coverage**: ~75% for asset processing

Commit message:

docs(assets): update minification details to reflect removal of lightningcss

site/content/docs/reference/architecture/rendering/assets-pipeline.md, after:

---
title: Asset Pipeline
description: How Bengal processes and optimizes static assets (CSS, JS, images, fonts)
weight: 30
category: rendering
tags: [rendering, assets, pipeline, minification, optimization, fingerprinting, css, js, images]
keywords: [assets, asset pipeline, minification, optimization, fingerprinting, CSS, JavaScript, images]
---

# Asset Pipeline

Bengal's asset pipeline provides efficient processing and delivery of static assets (CSS, JS, images, fonts) with optimization support.

## Overview

The asset pipeline (`bengal/assets/pipeline.py`) is a lightweight system that:
- Discovers assets from site and theme directories
- Processes assets (minification, optimization)
- Manages asset fingerprinting for cache busting
- Copies processed assets to output directory
- Integrates with incremental builds

## Asset Object (`bengal/core/asset.py`)

### Purpose
Represents a static file with metadata and processing capabilities

### Key Attributes
```python
class Asset:
    source_path: Path          # Original file location
    output_path: Path          # Destination in output directory
    asset_type: str            # Type (css, js, image, font, etc.)
    fingerprint: Optional[str] # SHA256 hash for cache busting
    minified: bool             # Whether asset has been minified
    optimized: bool            # Whether asset has been optimized
    metadata: Dict             # Additional metadata
```

### Asset Types

| Type | Extensions | Processing |
|------|-----------|------------|
| **CSS** | `.css`, `.scss`, `.sass`, `.less` | Minification, source maps |
| **JavaScript** | `.js`, `.mjs`, `.ts` | Minification, source maps |
| **Images** | `.jpg`, `.png`, `.gif`, `.webp`, `.svg` | Optimization, format conversion |
| **Fonts** | `.woff`, `.woff2`, `.ttf`, `.otf` | Copy only (already optimized) |
| **Data** | `.json`, `.yaml`, `.xml`, `.csv` | Copy, optional compression |
| **Other** | All others | Copy only |

### Key Methods

```python
def minify(self) -> None:
    """Minify CSS/JS files."""
    if self.asset_type in ('css', 'js'):
        minified_content = minifier.minify(self.content)
        self.save_minified(minified_content)
        self.minified = True

def optimize(self) -> None:
    """Optimize images (compression, format conversion)."""
    if self.asset_type == 'image':
        optimized = image_optimizer.optimize(self.source_path)
        self.save_optimized(optimized)
        self.optimized = True

def hash(self) -> str:
    """Generate SHA256 fingerprint for cache busting."""
    content = self.source_path.read_bytes()
    return hashlib.sha256(content).hexdigest()[:12]

def copy_to_output(self) -> None:
    """Copy asset to output directory with fingerprint."""
    if self.fingerprint:
        # Add fingerprint to filename
        # style.css -> style.abc123.css
        output = self.add_fingerprint_to_path()
    else:
        output = self.output_path

    shutil.copy2(self.source_path, output)
```

## Asset Discovery (`bengal/discovery/asset_discovery.py`)

### Purpose
Finds all static assets in site and theme directories

### Discovery Process

```python
def discover(site) -> List[Asset]:
    assets = []

    # 1. Discover site assets
    site_assets = discover_directory(site.assets_dir)
    assets.extend(site_assets)

    # 2. Discover theme assets
    if site.theme:
        theme_assets = discover_directory(site.theme.assets_dir)
        assets.extend(theme_assets)

    # 3. Preserve relative paths
    for asset in assets:
        asset.output_path = determine_output_path(asset)

    return assets

def discover_directory(path: Path) -> List[Asset]:
    assets = []
    for file_path in path.rglob('*'):
        if file_path.is_file() and not should_ignore(file_path):
            asset = Asset(
                source_path=file_path,
                asset_type=detect_type(file_path),
                metadata=extract_metadata(file_path)
            )
            assets.append(asset)
    return assets
```

### Exclusions
- Hidden files (`.gitignore`, `.DS_Store`)
- Cache directories (`.cache/`, `__pycache__/`)
- Build outputs (if nested incorrectly)
- Configurable ignore patterns

## Asset Pipeline (`bengal/assets/pipeline.py`)

### Purpose
Central coordinator for asset processing

### Processing Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start[Asset Discovery] --> Filter{Incremental?}

    Filter -->|Yes| Changed[Filter Changed Assets]
    Filter -->|No| All[All Assets]

    Changed --> Process[Process Assets]
    All --> Process

    Process --> Check{Asset Type}

    Check -->|CSS/JS| Minify[Minify]
    Check -->|Image| Optimize[Optimize]
    Check -->|Other| Copy[Copy Only]

    Minify --> Hash[Generate Hash]
    Optimize --> Hash
    Copy --> Hash

    Hash --> Output[Copy to Output]
    Output --> Done[Complete]
```

### Implementation

```python
class AssetPipeline:
    def __init__(self, site: Site, config: Dict):
        self.site = site
        self.config = config
        self.minify_enabled = config.get('minify_assets', True)
        self.optimize_images = config.get('optimize_images', True)
        self.fingerprint = config.get('fingerprint_assets', False)

    def process(self, assets: List[Asset], parallel: bool = True) -> None:
        # Separate CSS entries (require bundling) from other assets
        css_entries = [a for a in assets if a.is_css_entry_point()]
        other = [a for a in assets if not a.is_css_entry_point()]

        should_run_parallel = parallel and (
            len(assets) > 5 or (css_entries and other)
        )

        if should_run_parallel:
            # Unified thread pool for both CSS bundling and asset processing
            with ThreadPoolExecutor() as executor:
                # Submit CSS bundling tasks
                for entry in css_entries:
                    executor.submit(self.process_css, entry)

                # Submit other asset tasks
                for asset in other:
                    executor.submit(self.process_asset, asset)
        else:
            # Sequential fallback
            for asset in assets:
                self.process_asset(asset)

    def process_asset(self, asset: Asset) -> None:
        # 1. Minification
        if self.minify_enabled and asset.should_minify():
            asset.minify()

        # 2. Optimization
        if self.optimize_images and asset.should_optimize():
            asset.optimize()

        # 3. Fingerprinting
        if self.fingerprint:
            asset.fingerprint = asset.hash()

        # 4. Copy to output
        asset.copy_to_output()

        # 5. Update cache
        if self.incremental:
            self.cache.update_hash(asset.source_path)
```

## Asset Dependency Tracking (`bengal/cache/asset_dependency_map.py`)

### Purpose
Tracks relationships between assets (imports, references)

### Use Cases
- CSS imports: `@import "variables.css"`
- JS imports: `import { foo } from './module.js'`
- Image references in CSS: `background: url('image.png')`

### Implementation

```python
class AssetDependencyMap:
    def __init__(self):
        self.dependencies: Dict[Path, Set[Path]] = {}

    def add_dependency(self, asset: Path, dependency: Path) -> None:
        if asset not in self.dependencies:
            self.dependencies[asset] = set()
        self.dependencies[asset].add(dependency)

    def get_affected_assets(self, changed_asset: Path) -> Set[Path]:
        """Find all assets that depend on the changed asset."""
        affected = set()
        for asset, deps in self.dependencies.items():
            if changed_asset in deps:
                affected.add(asset)
        return affected
```

### Integration with Incremental Builds
When a CSS file changes, all CSS files that import it are also rebuilt.

## Configuration

Asset pipeline is configured via `bengal.toml`:

```toml
[assets]
# Enable/disable minification
minify_css = true
minify_js = true

# Enable/disable image optimization
optimize_images = true

# Fingerprinting for cache busting
fingerprint = false  # or true for production

# Exclude patterns
exclude = [
    "*.map",
    "*.orig",
    "drafts/**",
]

# Optimization settings
[assets.images]
quality = 85  # JPEG quality (1-100)
strip_metadata = true  # Remove EXIF data
formats = ["webp"]  # Generate additional formats
```

## Minification

### CSS Minification
- Removes whitespace and comments
- Shortens color codes (#ffffff → #fff)
- Combines selectors
- Removes unused rules (future)

### JavaScript Minification
- Removes whitespace and comments
- Shortens variable names (optional)
- Dead code elimination (optional)

### Implementation
Uses a built-in Python minifier for CSS (safe whitespace/comment removal) and `rjsmin` for JS (pure Python, no Node.js required). `lightningcss` was removed to support Python 3.14 free-threading.

## Image Optimization

### Supported Operations
- Lossless compression (PNG, WebP)
- Lossy compression with quality control (JPEG)
- Metadata stripping (EXIF, IPTC)
- Format conversion (e.g., PNG → WebP)
- Resizing (future)
- Responsive image generation (future)

### Implementation
Uses `Pillow` for image processing (widely available, pure Python + C extensions)

## Cache Busting

### Fingerprinting Strategy
Assets can include content hash in filename:

```
Original:      style.css
Fingerprinted: style.abc123.css
```

### Template Integration
Fingerprinted paths available in templates:

```jinja2
<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ asset_url('style.css') }}">
<!-- Renders as: -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/assets/style.abc123.css">
```

### Benefits
- Long cache TTL (1 year+)
- No stale cache issues
- Automatic invalidation on changes

## Asset Manifest System (0.1.4+)

Bengal generates a deterministic `asset-manifest.json` file that maps logical asset names to their fingerprinted output files. This ensures reliable asset resolution and eliminates stale fingerprinted assets.

### Purpose

The asset manifest solves several problems:
- **Stale Assets**: Prevents old fingerprinted files (e.g., `style.95230091.css`) from persisting after updates
- **Dev/Prod Sync**: Ensures development and production CSS stay in sync
- **Reliable Resolution**: Provides deterministic asset resolution without glob matching
- **Cache Busting**: Enables long cache TTLs with automatic invalidation

### Manifest Format

The manifest is written to `public/asset-manifest.json`:

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "generated_at": "2025-11-25T12:00:00Z",
  "assets": {
    "css/style.css": {
      "output_path": "assets/css/style.a1b2c3.css",
      "fingerprint": "a1b2c3",
      "size_bytes": 12345,
      "updated_at": "2025-11-25T12:00:00Z"
    },
    "js/app.js": {
      "output_path": "assets/js/app.d4e5f6.js",
      "fingerprint": "d4e5f6",
      "size_bytes": 67890
    }
  }
}
```

### Manifest-Driven Resolution

The `asset_url()` template helper consults the manifest first:

```python
def asset_url(logical_path: str) -> str:
    """Resolve logical asset path to fingerprinted output."""
    # 1. Check manifest first (deterministic)
    manifest = AssetManifest.load(site.output_dir / "asset-manifest.json")
    if manifest:
        entry = manifest.get(logical_path)
        if entry:
            return f"/{entry.output_path}"

    # 2. Fallback to glob matching (backward compatibility)
    return glob_find_asset(logical_path)
```

### Stale Fingerprint Cleanup

Before writing new fingerprinted files, Bengal:
1. Loads existing manifest (if present)
2. Identifies stale fingerprinted files (not in new manifest)
3. Removes stale files from output directory
4. Writes new manifest with updated mappings

This ensures only current assets exist in the output directory.

### CLI Inspection

Use `bengal assets status` to inspect asset mappings:

```bash
$ bengal assets status
Asset Manifest
css/style.css → /assets/css/style.a1b2c3.css (fingerprint: a1b2c3)
js/app.js → /assets/js/app.d4e5f6.js (fingerprint: d4e5f6)
```

This helps debug asset issues and verify manifest correctness.

### Integration with Build Process

The manifest is generated during asset processing:

```python
class AssetOrchestrator:
    def process(self):
        # ... process assets ...

        # Generate manifest
        manifest = AssetManifest()
        for asset in processed_assets:
            manifest.set_entry(
                logical_path=asset.logical_path,
                output_path=asset.output_path,
                fingerprint=asset.fingerprint,
                size_bytes=asset.size_bytes,
            )

        # Write manifest
        manifest.write(site.output_dir / "asset-manifest.json")
```

### Clean Output Builds

Use `--clean-output` flag to ensure clean builds:

```bash
bengal site build --clean-output
```

This removes all output files (including stale fingerprinted assets) before building, ensuring deterministic builds. Perfect for CI/CD pipelines.

### Benefits

- **Deterministic**: Same logical path always resolves to same fingerprinted file
- **Reliable**: No glob matching fallback needed (though still supported for backward compatibility)
- **Debuggable**: Manifest provides visibility into asset mappings
- **Clean**: Stale assets automatically removed
- **Fast**: O(1) lookup via dictionary

See: `bengal/assets/manifest.py` for implementation details.

## Performance

### Parallel Processing
Assets are processed in parallel using a **unified worker pool** when:
- 5+ assets to process OR mixed workload (CSS + other assets)
- Parallel mode enabled (default)
- Worker pool available

**Optimization (2025-11)**: CSS bundling and static asset processing (images, JS) now run concurrently in the same thread pool. This eliminates the "hang" where the build would wait for CSS to finish before starting image optimization.

**Measured speedup**: 2-3x for 10+ assets

### Incremental Builds
Only changed assets are reprocessed:
- File content hash comparison
- Dependency tracking for imports
- Cache invalidation on changes

**Measured speedup**: 15-30x for single asset changes

### Optimization Trade-offs
Image optimization is slowest operation (~100-500ms per image). Can be disabled for dev builds:

```toml
[assets]
optimize_images = false  # Dev mode
```

## Integration Points

### With Discovery
- AssetDiscovery finds assets
- AssetOrchestrator processes them
- Asset objects created and tracked

### With Incremental Builds
- BuildCache tracks asset file hashes
- AssetDependencyMap tracks imports
- Only changed assets reprocessed

### With Templates
- `asset_url()` function resolves asset paths
- Fingerprinted paths handled automatically
- Theme asset resolution

### With Themes
- Theme assets discovered automatically
- Theme assets override site assets
- Fallback chain: site → theme → default

## Health Validation

AssetValidator checks:
- All referenced assets exist
- Minification completed (if enabled)
- Optimization completed (if enabled)
- File sizes reasonable
- No broken asset references

```bash
bengal site build
# Asset validation runs automatically
# Reports missing assets, oversized files, etc.
```

## Future Enhancements

1. **Responsive Images**: Generate multiple sizes automatically
2. **Modern Format Support**: AVIF, WebP with fallbacks
3. **CSS Purging**: Remove unused CSS automatically
4. **Sprite Generation**: Combine small images into sprites
5. **CDN Integration**: Upload assets to CDN automatically
6. **Source Maps**: Generate source maps for minified files
7. **Preprocessor Support**: Built-in SCSS/Less compilation

## Testing

Asset pipeline testing:
- Unit tests: `tests/unit/test_asset.py`
- Integration tests: `tests/integration/test_asset_pipeline.py`
- Performance tests: `tests/performance/test_asset_processing.py`

**Coverage**: ~75% for asset processing
