content/api/bengal/health/validators/directives/_index.md, before:


---
title: "directives"
type: "python-module"
source_file: "bengal/bengal/health/validators/directives/__init__.py"
line_number: 1
description: "Directive validator package - checks directive syntax, usage, and performance. This package validates: - Directive syntax is well-formed - Required directive options present - Tab markers properly for..."
---

# directives
**Type:** Module
**Source:** [View source](bengal/bengal/health/validators/directives/__init__.py#L1)



**Navigation:**
[bengal](/api/bengal/) ›[health](/api/bengal/health/) ›[validators](/api/bengal/health/validators/) ›directives

Directive validator package - checks directive syntax, usage, and performance.

This package validates:
- Directive syntax is well-formed
- Required directive options present
- Tab markers properly formatted
- Nesting depth reasonable
- Performance warnings for directive-heavy pages

Refactored from single 1,094-line file into focused modules.
See RFC: plan/active/rfc-code-quality-improvements.md

Structure:
- constants.py: Known directives, thresholds, configuration
- analysis.py: DirectiveAnalyzer for extracting and analyzing directives
- checkers.py: Validation check functions

## Classes




### `DirectiveValidator`


**Inherits from:**`BaseValidator`Validates directive syntax and usage across the site.

Orchestrates validation by:
1. Analyzing directives across all pages (DirectiveAnalyzer)
2. Checking syntax validity (check_directive_syntax)
3. Checking completeness (check_directive_completeness)
4. Checking performance (check_directive_performance)
5. Checking rendering output (check_directive_rendering)

Checks:
- Directive blocks are well-formed (opening and closing)
- Required options are present
- Tab markers are properly formatted
- Nesting depth is reasonable
- Performance warnings for heavy directive usage









## Methods



#### `validate`
```python
def validate(self, site: Site, build_context = None) -> list[CheckResult]
```


Run directive validation checks.


**Parameters:**

| Name | Type | Default | Description |
|:-----|:-----|:--------|:------------|
| `site` | `Site` | - | Site instance to validate |
| `build_context` | - | - | Optional BuildContext (not used by this validator) |







**Returns**


`list[CheckResult]` - List of CheckResult objects



---
*Generated by Bengal autodoc from `bengal/bengal/health/validators/directives/__init__.py`*

Commit message:

tests: fix Python 3.14 compatibility and hypothesis timing issues
cache(build_cache): check for both .json and .json.zst in load() early return
tests(orchestration): update discover() mock assertions with build_context=ANY
tests(cache): explicit compress=False for tests reading raw JSON files
tests(cache): update expected paths for compressed .json.zst format
tests(file_lock): use compressed paths for lock file tests
tests(resource_cleanup): use sys.executable instead of 'python' for subprocess
tests(analysis): use /content/api/ path for autodoc detection tests
tests(hypothesis): add settings to suppress HealthCheck.too_slow and deadline
health(directives): fix E402 import order lint error

content/api/bengal/health/validators/directives/_index.md, after:


---
title: "directives"
type: "python-module"
source_file: "bengal/bengal/health/validators/directives/__init__.py"
line_number: 1
description: "Directive validator package - checks directive syntax, usage, and performance. This package validates: - Directive syntax is well-formed - Required directive options present - Tab markers properly for..."
---

# directives
**Type:** Module
**Source:** [View source](bengal/bengal/health/validators/directives/__init__.py#L1)



**Navigation:**
[bengal](/api/bengal/) ›[health](/api/bengal/health/) ›[validators](/api/bengal/health/validators/) ›directives

Directive validator package - checks directive syntax, usage, and performance.

This package validates:
- Directive syntax is well-formed
- Required directive options present
- Tab markers properly formatted
- Nesting depth reasonable
- Performance warnings for directive-heavy pages

Refactored from single 1,094-line file into focused modules.
See RFC: plan/active/rfc-code-quality-improvements.md

Structure:
- constants.py: Known directives, thresholds, configuration
- analysis.py: DirectiveAnalyzer for extracting and analyzing directives
- checkers.py: Validation check functions

## Classes




### `DirectiveValidator`


**Inherits from:**`BaseValidator`Validates directive syntax and usage across the site.

Orchestrates validation by:
1. Analyzing directives across all pages (DirectiveAnalyzer)
2. Checking syntax validity (check_directive_syntax)
3. Checking completeness (check_directive_completeness)
4. Checking performance (check_directive_performance)
5. Checking rendering output (check_directive_rendering)

Checks:
- Directive blocks are well-formed (opening and closing)
- Required options are present
- Tab markers are properly formatted
- Nesting depth is reasonable
- Performance warnings for heavy directive usage









## Methods



#### `validate`
```python
def validate(self, site: Site, build_context = None) -> list[CheckResult]
```


Run directive validation checks.

Uses cached content from build_context when available to avoid
redundant disk I/O (build-integrated validation).


**Parameters:**

| Name | Type | Default | Description |
|:-----|:-----|:--------|:------------|
| `site` | `Site` | - | Site instance to validate |
| `build_context` | - | - | Optional BuildContext with cached page contents. When provided, uses cached content instead of reading from disk (~4 seconds saved for large sites). |







**Returns**


`list[CheckResult]` - List of CheckResult objects



---
*Generated by Bengal autodoc from `bengal/bengal/health/validators/directives/__init__.py`*
