site/content/cli/project/_index.md, before:


---
title: "project"
type: "cli-reference"
source_file: "bengal/cli/commands/project.py"
line_number: 52
description: "📦 Project management and setup commands. Commands: init       Initialize project structure and content sections profile    Set your working profile (dev, themer, writer, ai) validate   Validate config..."
---

# project
**Type:** Command-Group
**Source:** [View source](https://github.com/lbliii/bengal/blob/main/bengal/cli/commands/project.py#L52)

:::{badge} Command Group
:class: badge-secondary
:::



**Command:** `bengal.project`


📦 Project management and setup commands.

Commands:
    init       Initialize project structure and content sections
    profile    Set your working profile (dev, themer, writer, ai)
    validate   Validate configuration and directory structure
    info       Display project information and statistics
    config     View and manage configuration settings

## Usage

```bash
project [OPTIONS] [ARGUMENTS]
```

## Subcommands

### `config`

⚙️  Manage Bengal configuration.

**Usage:** `project config [OPTIONS]`




### `info`

ℹ️  Display project information and statistics.

Shows:
    - Site title, baseurl, theme
    - Content statistics (pages, sections)
    - Asset counts
    - Configuration paths

**Usage:** `project info [OPTIONS]`




### `init`

🏗️  Initialize site structure with sections and pages.

**Usage:** `project init [OPTIONS]`




### `profile`

👤 Set your Bengal working profile / persona.

Profiles customize CLI behavior and output format based on your role:

    dev       👨‍💻  Full debug output, performance metrics, all commands
    themer    🎨  Focus on templates, themes, component preview
    writer    ✍️  Simple UX, focus on content, minimal tech details
    ai        🤖  Machine-readable output, JSON formats

**Usage:** `project profile [OPTIONS]`




### `validate`

✓ Validate Bengal project configuration and structure.

Checks:
    ✓ bengal.toml exists and is valid
    ✓ Required configuration fields
    ✓ Directory structure (content/, templates/, assets/)
    ✓ Theme configuration
    ✓ Content files parseable

**Usage:** `project validate [OPTIONS]`



---
*Generated by Bengal autodoc from `bengal/cli/commands/project.py`*

Commit message:

theme: add landing page CSS with premium feature cards, stats, quick links; enhance home.html template

site/content/cli/project/_index.md, after:


---
title: "project"
type: "cli-reference"
source_file: "bengal/cli/commands/project.py"
line_number: 52
description: "📦 Project management and setup commands. Commands: init       Initialize project structure and content sections profile    Set your working profile (dev, themer, writer, ai) validate   Validate config..."
---

# project
**Type:** Command-Group
**Source:** [View source](https://github.com/lbliii/bengal/blob/main/bengal/cli/commands/project.py#L52)

:::{badge} Command Group
:class: badge-secondary
:::



**Command:** `bengal.project`


📦 Project management and setup commands.

Commands:
    init       Initialize project structure and content sections
    profile    Set your working profile (dev, themer, writer, ai)
    validate   Validate configuration and directory structure
    info       Display project information and statistics
    config     View and manage configuration settings

## Usage

```bash
project [OPTIONS] [ARGUMENTS]
```

## Subcommands

### `config`

⚙️  Manage Bengal configuration.

**Usage:** `project config [OPTIONS]`




### `info`

ℹ️  Display project information and statistics.

Shows:
    - Site title, baseurl, theme
    - Content statistics (pages, sections)
    - Asset counts
    - Configuration paths

**Usage:** `project info [OPTIONS]`




### `init`

🏗️  Initialize site structure.

Uses the Component Model to generate sections and pages.

**Usage:** `project init [OPTIONS]`




### `profile`

👤 Set your Bengal working profile / persona.

Profiles customize CLI behavior and output format based on your role:

    dev       👨‍💻  Full debug output, performance metrics, all commands
    themer    🎨  Focus on templates, themes, component preview
    writer    ✍️  Simple UX, focus on content, minimal tech details
    ai        🤖  Machine-readable output, JSON formats

**Usage:** `project profile [OPTIONS]`




### `validate`

✓ Validate Bengal project configuration and structure.

Checks:
    ✓ bengal.toml exists and is valid
    ✓ Required configuration fields
    ✓ Directory structure (content/, templates/, assets/)
    ✓ Theme configuration
    ✓ Content files parseable

**Usage:** `project validate [OPTIONS]`



---
*Generated by Bengal autodoc from `bengal/cli/commands/project.py`*
