site/content/cli/project/init.md, before:


---
title: "init"
type: "cli-reference"
source_file: "bengal/cli/helpers/error_handling.py"
line_number: 365
description: "🏗️  Initialize site structure with sections and pages."
---

# init
**Type:** Command
**Source:** [View source](https://github.com/lbliii/bengal/blob/main/bengal/cli/helpers/error_handling.py#L365)

:::{badge} Command
:class: badge-secondary
:::



**Command:** `bengal.project.init`


🏗️  Initialize site structure with sections and pages.

## Usage

```bash
init [OPTIONS] [ARGUMENTS]
```

## Options

### `sections`


Content sections to create (e.g., blog posts about). Default: blog

**Type:** `text`

**Default:** `('blog',)`




### `with_content`


Generate sample content in each section

**Type:** `boolean`

**Default:** `False`




### `pages_per_section`


Number of sample pages per section (with --with-content)

**Type:** `integer`

**Default:** `3`




### `dry_run`


Preview what would be created without creating files

**Type:** `boolean`

**Default:** `False`




### `force`


Overwrite existing sections and files

**Type:** `boolean`

**Default:** `False`



---
*Generated by Bengal autodoc from `bengal/cli/helpers/error_handling.py`*

Commit message:

theme: add landing page CSS with premium feature cards, stats, quick links; enhance home.html template

site/content/cli/project/init.md, after:


---
title: "init"
type: "cli-reference"
source_file: "bengal/cli/helpers/error_handling.py"
line_number: 83
description: "🏗️  Initialize site structure. Uses the Component Model to generate sections and pages."
---

# init
**Type:** Command
**Source:** [View source](https://github.com/lbliii/bengal/blob/main/bengal/cli/helpers/error_handling.py#L83)

:::{badge} Command
:class: badge-secondary
:::



**Command:** `bengal.project.init`


🏗️  Initialize site structure.

Uses the Component Model to generate sections and pages.

## Usage

```bash
init [OPTIONS] [ARGUMENTS]
```

## Options

### `sections`


Content sections to create (e.g., blog, docs). Default: blog

**Type:** `text`

**Default:** `('blog',)`




### `with_content`


Generate sample content in each section

**Type:** `boolean`

**Default:** `False`




### `pages_per_section`


Number of sample pages per section (with --with-content)

**Type:** `integer`

**Default:** `3`




### `dry_run`


Preview what would be created without creating files

**Type:** `boolean`

**Default:** `False`




### `force`


Overwrite existing sections and files

**Type:** `boolean`

**Default:** `False`



---
*Generated by Bengal autodoc from `bengal/cli/helpers/error_handling.py`*
