site/content/docs/theming/_index.md, before:

---
title: Theming
description: Design and styling for Bengal sites
weight: 25
draft: false
lang: en
tags: [theming, design, templates, css]
keywords: [theming, design, templates, css, jinja2, assets, styling]
category: guide
cascade:
  type: doc
---

# Theming

Everything about design, styling, and customization in Bengal.

## Overview

Bengal's theming system provides:

- **Jinja2 templating** — Powerful template engine with inheritance and partials
- **Asset pipeline** — CSS, JavaScript, images, and fonts handling
- **Theme packages** — Use, customize, or create complete themes
- **Design tokens** — Consistent theme variables across your site

## Quick Links

| I want to... | Go to... |
|--------------|----------|
| Learn template basics | [Templating](/docs/theming/templating/) |
| Handle CSS/JS/images | [Assets](/docs/theming/assets/) |
| Use or customize themes | [Themes](/docs/theming/themes/) |
| Look up theme variables | [Variables Reference](/docs/theming/variables/) |

## Sections

### [Templating](/docs/theming/templating/)

Jinja2 templating fundamentals — layouts, inheritance, partials, and the complete template functions reference.

### [Assets](/docs/theming/assets/)

The asset pipeline — stylesheets, JavaScript, images, and custom fonts. Optimization and processing options.

### [Themes](/docs/theming/themes/)

Working with theme packages — using existing themes, customizing without forking, and creating your own.

### [Variables Reference](/docs/theming/variables/)

Complete reference for all theme variables available in templates.

Commit message:

docs(theming): move recipes to theming/cookbook with use-case driven examples; delete generic recipes

site/content/docs/theming/_index.md, after:

---
title: Theming
description: Design and styling for Bengal sites
weight: 25
draft: false
lang: en
tags: [theming, design, templates, css]
keywords: [theming, design, templates, css, jinja2, assets, styling]
category: guide
cascade:
  type: doc
---

# Theming

Everything about design, styling, and customization in Bengal.

## Overview

Bengal's theming system provides:

- **Jinja2 templating** — Powerful template engine with inheritance and partials
- **Asset pipeline** — CSS, JavaScript, images, and fonts handling
- **Theme packages** — Use, customize, or create complete themes
- **Design tokens** — Consistent theme variables across your site

## Quick Links

| I want to... | Go to... |
|--------------|----------|
| Learn template basics | [Templating](/docs/theming/templating/) |
| Handle CSS/JS/images | [Assets](/docs/theming/assets/) |
| Use or customize themes | [Themes](/docs/theming/themes/) |
| Look up theme variables | [Variables Reference](/docs/theming/variables/) |

## Sections

### [Templating](/docs/theming/templating/)

Jinja2 templating fundamentals — layouts, inheritance, partials, and the complete template functions reference.

### [Assets](/docs/theming/assets/)

The asset pipeline — stylesheets, JavaScript, images, and custom fonts. Optimization and processing options.

### [Themes](/docs/theming/themes/)

Working with theme packages — using existing themes, customizing without forking, and creating your own.

### [Template Cookbook](/docs/theming/recipes/)

Practical examples showing Bengal's filters and template patterns — list recent posts, group by category, filter by tags, and more.

### [Variables Reference](/docs/theming/variables/)

Complete reference for all theme variables available in templates.
